Add EIP: MLOAD8 and CALLDATALOAD8 Opcodes (#11038)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-8120.md

---

## Abstract

This EIP introduces new EVM opcodes that allow loading a single byte from memory or calldata in a single operation, reducing gas cost and bytecode size compared to existing patterns based on `MLOAD (0x51)` or `CALLDATALOAD (0x35)` followed by bit shifting.

## Motivation

Currently, the only way to read a single byte from calldata or memory is to use `CALLDATALOAD` or `MLOAD` and then shift the loaded 32-byte word.
For example, reading the byte at offset x from calldata requires:

```
PUSH x
CALLDATALOAD
PUSH1 248
SHR
```

This pattern increases runtime gas cost and adds three extra bytes to the deployed bytecode for each single-byte access. Contracts that frequently parse byte-oriented calldata or instruction streams incur unnecessary overhead.
This EIP proposes two new opcodes that allow loading a single byte directly in one operation.

## Specification

### MLOAD8 (TBD)

- **Stack input**: `offset`
- **Stack output**: `value`

Reads one byte from memory at position offset and pushes it onto the stack as a 32-byte word, with the byte placed in the least significant position.
If offset is greater than or equal to the current memory size, the returned value is 0.

> Memory expansion rules apply in the same way as for `MLOAD`.

Reviewer: This reference to `MLOAD` might be ambiguous regarding the *size* of the expansion. `MLOAD` reads 32 bytes, so it expands memory to cover `offset + 32`. `MLOAD8` should presumably only expand to `offset + 1` (like `MSTORE8`).

```suggestion
Memory expansion rules apply in the same way as for `MSTORE8` (extending memory to at least `offset + 1` bytes).
```
